Chapter
4
 Expert simulation in direct current
4,1 Introduction to the (Expert) methodMode
If you are not interested in learning to simulate like an expert, you can skip this chapter. In this chapter, I describe advanced concepts of Symbulator operation, as well as examples that show how you can use the Expert method(Expert) Mode to save time during symbolic simulations. To get the most benefit, you must read this chapter attentively and thoroughly.
In the previous chapter we did several symbolic simulations, and we learned to use the solve()solve command and the solves tool. In this chapter, we will learn to simulate with the Expert method(Expert) Mode. This method mode appeared in version 3 of the Symbulator, in order to give the user more control over the simulation process.
In the simulations we have seen so far, the Symbulator behaves like a black box, in which you supply the circuit description and Symbulator gives you the results. And that is all: while you are involved in complimenting the girl sitting next to you, or contemplating the immortality of the crab, Symbulator is working to generate the equations, solve them and save the answers. Your only responsibility is to correctly enter the circuit description, and Symbulator does the rest.
Expert method(Expert) Mode gives you the power to play a more important role in the simulation, because it gives you the capabilitiy to modify the equations which Symbulator generates, before the calculator solves them. In return, you assume part of the responsibility for the simulation, which is why the Expert method(Expert) Mode must be used with care. To use Symbulator as an expert requires deeper knowledge than is required of the casual user. Never the less, for those willing to learn a little more, the Expert method(Expert) Mode is an attractive option, because it offers faster simulations.
4.2 Theory
4.2.1 The procedure in general
An expert simulation, as the word implies, requires that you be an expert, not only in the use of Symbulator, but also an expert in its internal operations. Let us learn, then the internal simulation processes. In general, a simulation done by Symbulator consists of these steps:
Equations are generated to describe the circuit.
These equations are solved.
The answers are stored.
Within this general framework, we can say that the Expert method(Expert) Mode allows us to manipulate the equations generated in step 1, before they are solved in step 2, so that when the answers are stored in step 3, they are in the form we want.
4.2.2 Equations of first level
The necessary equations used by Symbulator to solve a circuit are called equations of the first level. Symbulator generates two types of first level equations: node equations, and special node equations.
There is a node equations for each circuit node. These equations are generated using Ohm's law and Kirchoff's currents law. The Symbulator will generate an equation for each node which fulfills Kirchoff's currents law: the sum of all the currents entering the node must be zero. To describe the currents of resistive elements, Symbulator uses Ohm's law.
In addition, a special equation is developed for each special element in the circuit. These equations are generated according to the theoretical formulas which describe the behavior of the elements. It may seem strange, but voltage sources and short circuits are special elements. This results because Symbulator uses nodal analysis, so, the only elements (seen so far) which are not special are resistances and current sources. The others are considered special, and are so associated with a special equation, which will increase the number of equations generated by the Symbulator.
For example, to solve a circuit with five nodes, two voltage sources and one short circuit, Symbulator will generate a total of eight equations of the first level. It does not matter if this circuit has one thousand resistances and seven hundred current sources, it will still have eight first-level equations. However, the complexity of the eight equations increases as more resistances and current sources are connected to the nodes.
How many first-level equations will be generated to simulate a circuit with three nodes and one voltage source? Four: one for each node, and one more for the voltage source.
In our algebra courses, we learned that we need n equations to completely solve a system of n unknowns. This means that for the first circuit, which has eight equations, we can solve for eight unknowns. In the second circuit, we can solve for four unknowns, since we have four equations. The unknowns which can be solved with the first-level equations are called first-level variables.
4.2.3 Variables of first level
As expected, Symbulator generates the first-level equations based on the first-level variables. There are as many first-level variables as there are first-level equations. Which means, indirectly, that there will be as many first-level variables as there are nodes, voltage sources and short circuits in the circuit.
With the elements we have seen so far, Symbulator generates three types of first-level variables: node voltages, voltage source currents, and short circuit currents.
Each node voltage in the circuit is a first-level variable. When solving a circuit which has three nodes 1, 2 and 3, Symbulator creates three first-level variables called v1, v2 and v3.
The current through each voltage source is a first-level variable. When solving a circuit with two voltage sources ex and e1, Symbulator creates two first-level variables called iex and ie1.
In addition, each short-circuit current is a first-level variable. So, when solving a circuit with a short circuit called s1, Symbulator creates a first-level variable called is1.
After solving the first-level equations, the results are stored in the first-level variables. Can you guess how the answers are named? Obviously, as the names of the first-level variables. In the example circuit with five nodes, two voltage sources and one short circuit, eight first-level equations are created based on the eight first-level variables. The simulation results are the five node voltages, the two voltage-source currents, and the single short-circuit current.
How many first-level variables will Symbulator generate for the circuit with three nodes and one voltage source? Obviously, there will be four first-level equations: one for the voltage source, and three for the nodes. After the four first-level equations are solved, there are four first-level results: one for the voltage source current, and three for the node voltages.
4.2.4 Second-level variables
I have described currents in voltages sources and short circuits as first-level variables. However, currents in other elements such as current sources and resistances are called second-level variables.
Voltage drops across resistances and sources are also second-level variables. So, in a circuit with four nodes, three resistances, two current sources, two voltage sources, and one short circuit, we will have these first-level variables:
4 node voltages
2 currents in the voltage sources
1 current in the short circuit
and these second-level variables:
3 currents in the resistances
2 currents in the current sources.
7 voltage drops across the 3 resistance and the 4 sources
This results in a total of 4 + 2 + 1 = 7 first-level variables, with their respective first-level equations, and 3 + 2 + 7 = 12 second-level variables. Note that the short circuit does not generate a voltage drop (see section 2.6.3 on short circuit results).
The second-level variables are not included in the first-level equations. So, how are these variables related to the simulation results?
4.2.5 Second-level expressions
The answer is simple. For each second-level variable, the Symbulator generates a second-level expression, which is a function only of the first-level variables. So, given the first-level results, all the second-level variables are inmediatly defined by these expressions.
There are two types of second-level expressions: those which are replaced by their results after the solution, and those which remain expressed in terms of the first-level variables. That is, after the first-level equations are solved and the results are stored in the first-level variables, Symbulator evaluates some of the second-level expressions, and so generates second-level results which are stored in the appropriate variables. However, other second-level expressions are not evaluated and remain expressions instead of results. Second-level expressions which are not evaluated are those that correspond to the currents in current sources, and the voltage drops. These remain algebraic expressions as functions of the node voltages.
4.2.6 Third-level variables
In direct current (DC) and alternating current (AC) simulations, there is another group of variables called third-level variables. They are given this name because they are generated only after the solution of the first-level equations and the evaluation of the second-level expressions. In other words, they are only created when the previous levels of variables have both been solved.
The third-level variables are the powers consumed by the elements. They are of course generated according to the definition of electrical power, which is the product of the voltage drop across an element (the first-level variables) and the current (the second-level variables) through the element, which must be previously defined.
4.2.7 The normal procedure in detail
We have learned about first-level equations, variables and results, and second-level expressions and variables, and third-level variables. I will now describe the simulation process in detail, as it relates to these variables. First, the procedure of a normal simulation, which does not use the Expert method(Expert) Mode:
First-level equations are generated which describe the circuit entered by the user, based on the first-level variables. The second-level expressions are also generated, as functions of the first-level variables.
The first-level equations are solved for the first-level variables.
The first-level results are stored in the first-level variables. Some second-level expressions are evaluated, and their second-level variable results are stored. In analyses direct current and alternating current analyses, the third-level variables are generated, which are the powers consumed by the elements.
4.2.8 Procedure options for the Expert method(Expert) Mode
Several options are available when simulating with the Expert method(Expert) Mode. The first option is to choose the correct analysis type. These options are direct current (DC) analysis, alternating current (AC) analysis, frequency domain (FD) analysis and transient analysis (TR).
 
Figure 20. TI-89 screen showing option for analysis type
Choose the desired analysis type and press [ENTER]. Next, the calculator shows a form from which you choose two options that determine how floating-point numbers are handled:
 
Figure 21. TI-89 screen showing floating-point options
The first option, Digits?, sets the number of digits to be used in the calculations. Normally this value should be set to 9, unless a different precision is required for some reason.
The second option, Format?, is used to set the display format. You can set the display format to Normal, Engineering or Scientific.
Press [ENTER] after you have chosen the desired options, then the display shows another form. In this form, you set options which affect the manipulation of equations and unknowns of the first level. You can change the settings or not, as needed.
This screen is called “Expert Mode(Expert) Mode - 1st Level”. There are four fields and a menu of options:
 
Figure 22. Expert Mode(Expert) Mode - 1st level, in the TI-89
The first field shows the first level unknowns. If there is more than one unknown, they are shown separated with commas between curly brackets: {}.
The second field shows the first level equations. If there is more than one equation, they are shown connected by the 'and' operator.
The third and fourth fields are used to specifies specify known first-level variables and values. The third field is used to specify the name of a first-level variable whose value is known. These variables are called conditional variables. If there is more than one known variable, they must be separated with commas, for example, name1, name2, name3. The fourth field is used to specify the values of the variables listed in the third field. If there is a single variable, its valued is specified as an equality, for example, v1 = 3.5. If there is more than one, the equalities are connected with the 'and' operator, for example, v1=3.5 and v2=5 and ie1=-2. Note that only first-level variables of the first level can be specified in these fields.
The menu shown under the four fields has three options which let you control the simulation process. The options are 1) run the simulation, 2) run the simulation and keep the equations, and 3) only store the equations.
 
Figure 23. Menu options in the TI-89
Let us see next what each menu option means.
4.2.9 Only store the equations
If you choose the third option, “Just Keep”, then Symbulator will simply create four variables: 
 'Unknown', which is a list of the variables of the first level
 'Equation', which holds the first-level equations
 'Wheneq', which holds the conditional equations
 'Whenvar', which holds the conditional variables.
Each variable is a list of text strings. Any user modifications the user may have introduced while they were displayed in the dialog box are reflected in these variables. The purpose of this the “Just Keep” option is to keep the equations are other variables so that the solves tool can be used. If the circuit is large or complicated, the generated equations are may be too large to be shown on the screen. In this case, the equations are not displayed, but instead a message is shown indicated that the equations will be stored automatically. However, in most cases the equations will fit on the display screen. This figure shows the message:
 
Figure 24. Display message, in the TI-89
After the four variables are created, Symbulator shows a new screen called “Expert Mode(Expert) Mode - 2nd Level”. You use this screen to choose whether or not you want to save the second-level expressions which have been generated.

 
Figure 25. Expert Mode(Expert) Mode - Second Level, in the TI-89
You choose to either keep the expressions or delete them. If you choose to delete them, Symbulator deletes them for you. If you choose to keep them, they are stored, and then displayed on a third screen is displayed, which is called “Expert Mode(Expert) Mode - 3rd level”. In this screen you choose whether or not to generate the third-level expressions.
 
Figure 26. Expert Mode(Expert) Mode - 3rd Level, in the TI-89
If you choose not to generate the expressions, Symbulator exits. If you choose to generate the expressions, Symbulator does that, then exits.

4.2.10 Simulate and store
If you chose the second option, “Symbulate+Keep”, that is, to simulate and keep the equations, then Symbulator creates the four variables described in the previous section, then the simulation proceeds as usual. All levels of expressions and variables are generated automatically, taking into account the changes you have made.
4.2.11 Simulate only
If you choose the first option, “Symbulate”, then Symbulator runs the simulation without creating the four variables. Steps 2, 3 and 4 are executed, taking into account the changes you have made. Now that we have learned the theory, we will practice it. So, let us solve the problems of the previous chapter, but this time, like experts.

4.3 Practice
Problem N° 013 with Expert Mode(Expert) Mode
Problem: determine Determine the numerical values of vx and ix in the following circuit.
 
Figure 16. Circuit for Problem N° 013.
Solution:
4.3.1 Initial steps
We name the nodes and elements, and delete the variables:
DelVar ra, vx
We enter the circuit description and specify expert simulation:
sq\expert("e1,1,0,18;ra,1,0,ra;r1,1,0,6;r2,2,1,5;ex,2,0,vx")
We start the simulation with [ENTER]. We choose DC analysis and press [ENTER]. We leave the floating point formats unchanged and press [ENTER]. The screen shows status messages indicating that Expert mode(Expert) Mode is activated and that the first step is executed. In this screen we can see the equations generated by Symbulator, and the unknown variables to be solved.
Remember that resistor R5 was defined so that the direction of its current agrees with the that of the 12A current, as defined in the problem. However, if we read the list of first-level unknown variables in the first field, we see that this resistor current is not shown, for it is not a first-level unknown. On the other hand, currents for the two voltage sources, ie1 and iex, are shown, for they do are first-level unknowns.
Since the current of the ex source is defined from node 2 to node 0, we can say that the current iex is equal to -12A. The negative sign is used since the source current is defined opposite the direction shown in the problem.
Now the time has come to think carefully about the problem, and what results are needed. We see that Symbulator has generated a system of four equations in and four unknowns, which also has one symbolic value. We consider this symbolic value as an unknown, because it must be solved to obtain a numerical answer. So, we really have a system of four equations and 5 five unknowns. We can look at this situation from two perspectives: we either have an extra unknown, or we need another equation.
We will solve this problem first from the first perspective, and then from the second.
4.3.2 Eliminating an unknown
If we have an extra unknown, we must eliminate it so we can solve the system of four equations and four unknowns. We take three steps to eliminate the unknown. First, we delete iex from the list of unknowns in the first field. We don't need it, because it's value is will be defined as known. Second, we add a new first-level variable vx to the list of unknowns. Finally, we add the equality iex=-12 to the fourth field. After making these modifications, the fields look like this:
First-level unknowns: { v1, ie1, v2, vx }
The first-level equations were not modified.
Known variable names: iex
Known variable name values: iex = -12 
We press [ENTER] to continue the simulation, and the screen shows the status messages for the remaining three simulation steps, then 'Done' is shown.
Unlike the previous techniques which require use of the solve()solve functions and the solves tool, this Expert Mode(Expert) Mode simulation does not require additional manipulation to obtain numerical answers. By modifying the list of unknowns and specifying the known value, we reduced a system of four equations and five unknowns to a system of four equations and unknowns. So, the simulation results (which are now in the current folder) are numerical results.
By recalling ir1, we find that the current ix is 3A. To find the value of vx, we have three options: 1) recall the node v2 voltage, 2) recall the voltage drop across source vxex, or 3) simply recall the vx voltage. Remember that we included vx in the list of unknown first-level variables, so Symbulator solved for it. By any of these three methods, we find that vx = 78V.
Now let us use the other perspective to solve the problem.
4.3.3 Adding an equation
To solve a system of five equations in and five unknowns, we must add a new equation. To solve this problem by adding an equation, we execute the steps of section 4.3.1 until the First Level screen is shown.
DelVar ra, vx
sq\expert("e1,1,0,18;ra,1,0,ra;r1,1,0,6;r2,2,1,5;ex,2,0,vx")
We start the simulation with [ENTER]. We choose DC analysis and press [ENTER]. We leave the floating-point formats as they are, and press [ENTER]. The screen shows the status messages indicating that Expert Mode(Expert) Mode is active and the first step is complete. Next, the First Level form is shown.
To add an equation we must do two things: 1) add the variable vx to the list of first-level unknown variables, and 2) add an equality to the list of first-level equations, which is iex = -12. After these changes, the field contents are:
First-level unknowns: { v1, ie1, v2, iex, vx }
First-level equations: (5*ie1*ra-ra*(vx-33)+90)/ra=0 and 5*iex+vx=18 and v1=18 and v2=vx and iex=-12
Known variable names: in targetempty.
Known variables: in targetempty.
We have changed a system of four equations and five unknowns into a system of five equations and five unknowns. We press [ENTER] to continue the simulation, the status messages are shown, then 'Done' is shown, indicating the the simulation is complete. The numerical results are in the current folder.
We recall the value of ir1 to find that ix is 3A. We recall the value of v2, or vx, or vex, to find that vx is 78V. This problem illustrates that Expert mode(Expert) Mode can save an expert user time, but it requires good knowledge of circuits, algebra and the use of Symbulator.
Now let us see another problem of the previous chapter.

Problem N° 014 with the Expert Method(Expert) Mode
Problem: Determine the numerical values of vx and ix in the following circuit.
 
Figure 17. Circuit for Problem N° 014.
Solution:
We name the nodes and elements, and clear the the symbolic names.
DelVar rx
We enter the circuit description and the expert simulation command.
sq\expert("j1,0,1,6;r1,1,2,1;r2,1,3,5;j2,3,2,10;r3,3,0,2;rx,2,4,rx;r4,4,0,3")
We start the simulation with [ENTER] and choose DC analysis. We leave the floating point formats unchanged and press [ENTER]. The display shows the status messages indicating that Expert mode(Expert) Mode is being used and that the first step is complete. Then, the first level screen is shown.
We have a system of four equations and five unknowns, where the fifth unknown is the symbolic value of rx, which must be solved to get numeric values. We will solve this problem by adding an equation to the system, which is the simplest method. First, we add rx to the list of first level unknown variables, so that Symbulator now considers it an unknown. Second, we add an equation to the first level equations list: ir3=4. So now the field contents are:
Incognitos of first level: { v1, v2, v3, v4, rx }
Equations of first level: (rx*(v1-v2+10)-v2+v4)/rx=0 and
(rx*v4-3*(v2-v4))/rx=0 and 6*v1-5*v2-v3-30=0 and 2*v1-7*v3-100=0 and
ir3=4
Known variable names: in target.
Values of known variables: in target.
First-level unknowns: { v1, v2, v3, v4, rx }
First-level equations: (rx*(v1-v2+10)-v2+v4)/rx=0 and (rx*v4-3*(v2-v4))/rx=0 and 6*v1-5*v2-v3-30=0 and 2*v1-7*v3-100=0 and ir3=4
Known variable names: empty.
Values of known variables: empty.
Now I must explain what is allowed in Expert mode(Expert) Mode, and what is not. Note that ir3 is included in the equations, but ir3 is not a variable of the first level, but of the second level. At this point, step 1 of the simulation has already been executed, in which the second-level equations have been generated, which express variables are defined as expressions of the variables of the first level. Therefore, we are allowed to include second-level variables in the first-level equations, because the second-level variables are expressed internally in terms of the first-level variables. On the other hand, you cannot specify second-level variables with known values in the third and fourth fields: these fields can only be used for the values of variables of the first level.
Let us return to the problem. After we change the system of four equations and five unknowns to a system of five equations and five unknowns, we press [ENTER] and the screen messages show us that the three remaining symulation steps are executed.
Finally the message "Done" is shown, and the numerical answers are in the current folder. We recall the value of ir1 and find that ix = -8A. We recall the value of vrx and find that vx = 80V. It is possible to solve this problem with the other technique, in which we eliminate an unknown variable, but that method is a little more complicated. We would have to add the value of some first-level variable in the third and fourth fields. In order to express the current of 4A as a first-level unknown, we would use Ohm's law to relate the voltage of node 3 and the 2 ohm resistance, to find the value of v3: v3 = (4A)(2W) = 8V. The procedure, then, would be:
DelVar rx
sq\expert("j1,0,1,6;r1,1,2,1;r2,1,3,5;j2,3,2,10;r3,3,0,2;rx,2,4,rx;r4,4,0,3")
We start the simulation by pressing [ENTER], choose DC analysis, and leave the floating point formats unchanged, then press [ENTER] to continue. The display shows that Expert mode(Expert) Mode is activated and the first step is executed, then shows the Expert method(Expert) Mode first-level’s screen.
To eliminate one system unknown, we must do three things. First, we remove v3 from the list of first-level unknown variables in the first field, because we know its value. Second, we add rx to the list of first-level unknown variables. Third, we add the name v3 to the third field, and specify its value in the fourth field as v3=8. After these changes, the fields are:
First level unknowns: { v1, v2, rx, v4 }
The equations of first level were not modified.
Known variables: v3
Values of known variables: v3=8
We press [ENTER] to continue the simulation, the screen shows the status messages for the three remaining simulation steps, and finally "Done" is shown.
We recall the value of ir1, and find that ix = -8A. We recall the value of vrx, and find that vx = 80V. This example shows that when it is difficult to declare a known value as a first-level variable, the method to add an equation is easier than eliminating an unknown. Never the less, eliminating an unknown has the advantage of reducing the system of equations by one, making the system easier for the calculator to solve. This is important in more complicated circuits, more complicated than we see in these pages.
Problem N° 015 with the Expert method(Expert) Mode.
Problem: Determine the numerical values of vx and ix in the following circuit.
 
Figure 18. Circuit for Problem N° 015.
Solution:
We named the nodes and elements, and delete the name ix:
DelVar ix
We enter the circuit description and specify expert simulation:
sq\expert("e1,1,0,60;r1,1,2,8;r2,2,0,10;r3,2,3,4;r4,3,0,2;jx,0,3,ix")
We start the simulation by pressing [ENTER], choose DC analysis, and leave the floating point formats unchanged. After pressing [ENTER], the display shows that Expert mode(Expert) Mode is active, and the first simulation step is executed. The first-level screen is shown. Like the previous problems, we can solve this one by adding an equation or by eliminating an unknown. To add an equation, we change the field contents so that we have five equations in and five unknowns:
First level unknowns: { v1, ie1, v2, v3, ix }
First level equations: 8*ie1-v2+60=0 and 4*ix+v2-3*v3=0 and v1=60
and 19*v2-10*(v3+30)=0 and ir1=5
Known variable names: in targetempty.
Values of known variables: in targetempty.
On the other hand, to solve the problem by eliminating an unknown, we change the fields so that we have a system of four equations in four unknowns, by specifying the value of a first-level variable, like this:
First level unknowns: { v1, v2, v3, ix }
The equations of first level were not modified.
Known variable names: ie1
Values of known variables: ie1=-5
You can use either method, as you prefer. Next, we press [ENTER] and the display shows that the three remaining steps are executed, then the display shows "Done".
We recall the value for ix and find that ix = 1A. We recall the value of -vjx, or v3, and find that vx = 8V. Let us see one more problem.
Problem N° 016 with the Expert method(Expert) Mode
Problem. Determine the value of k such that voltage vy is zero.
 
Figure 19. Circuit for Problem N° 016.
Solution:
We name the nodes and elements and delete variable name k.
DelVar k
We enter the circuit description and specify expert simulation.
sq\expert("e1,1,0,6;r1,1,x,1;r2,x,0,4;r3,x,y,2;j1,0,y,2;r4,y,2,3;e2,2,0,k*vx")
We start the simulation by pressing [ENTER], choose DC analysis, and leave the floating point formats unchanged. The display shows the Expert mode(Expert) Mode is active and that the first simulation step is complete. Next the display shows the first-level screen. This problem can be solved by adding and equation or eliminating and unknown.
To add an equation, the field contents are modified so that we have seven equations and seven unknowns:
First level unknowns: { v1, ie1, vx, vy, v2, ie2, k }
First-level equations: 2*k*vx+3*vx-5*vy+12=0 and k*vx+3*ie2-vy=0
and ie1-vx+6=0 and v1=6 and v2=k*vx and 7*vx-2*(vy+12)=0 and vy=0
Known variables: in targetempty.
Values of known variables: in targetempty.
Alternatively, to solve the problem by eliminating an unknown, we modify the field contents so we have six equations in six unknowns by specifying the value of a first-level variable, like this:
First level unknowns: { v1, ie1, vx, v2, ie2, k }
The equations of first level were not modified.
Known variable names: vy
Values of known variables: vy=0
You can use either method, as you prefer. Next we press [ENTER] and the display shows the execution of the three remaining simulation steps, and finally "Done" is shown. We recall the value of k and find that k = -13/4.

4,.4 The solves tool after expert simulation
The solves tool can be used at any time. In the previous chapter we used it after a symbolic simulation. In that case, the equation variables and unknowns were not in the current folder. When we used solves for the first time, the fields were empty, and we manually entered the equations we wanted to solve:
 
Figure 27. Fields for solves on the TI-89
When we next used solves, the fields showed the values of the previous equations unless you had deleted them.
To this point we have done our expert simulations using the first option of Expert mode(Expert) Mode, which is to simulate only, without keeping the equations. For that reason, the variables Equation and Unknown are not created in the current folder.
On the other hand, we could have used either of the other two options, and both simulated and kept the equations, or only save the equations. In that case, the variables Equation and Unknown would be saved in the current folder.
The solves tool works differently when executed just after an expert simulation in which the equations are saved. In this case, the fields are not empty but show the equations and unknowns of the Expert simulation, in the fields Equation and Unknown.
For example, if we simulate a circuit with the Expert method(Expert) Mode and choose the Just Keep option, then Symbulator will store the equations and unknowns, and we can use the solves tool to solve them. Note that if you want to add a second-level variable in the first-level equations, you must specify that Symbulator save the second-level expressions.
When we use the solves tool after an expert simulation, the fields show the equations and unknowns like this:

 
Figure 28. Fields for solves on the TI-89solves field on the TI-89
The solves tool shows two menus in the lower part. You use the first menu to choose to solve the equations as real or complex. You must specify real solutions unless AC analysis is being used. You use the second menu to choose whether or not to use conditions. What are the conditions? They are nothing more than the known values of the first-level variables. If we choose to use the conditions, a new screen is shown so that you can enter the variable names and their values.
 
Figure 29. Fields for known values on the TI-89
In the field called When eq's, the first-level equations must be entered. In the field called When var's, the names of the first-level variables are entered.

4.5 Verification of numerical results of expert simulations
We can use the procedures of section 3.7 to verify numerical results of expert simulations.
Before closing this chapter, I want to congratulate you on deciding to become an expert Symbulator user. Now that you know the theoretical concepts, you can use Expert mode(Expert) Mode to save time. The rewards for your efforts in learning Expert mode(Expert) Mode will be satisfaction and faster simulation results.